[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed"
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with Psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today, we are going to
look at spirituality
from a cross-cultural
perspective.
My guest is Joan Halifax,
roshi of the Upaya Zen Center
in Santa Fe, New
Mexico, anthropologist,
and author of a number of books,
including "Shamanic Voices,"
"The Human Encounter
with Death,"
"The Fruitful Darkness," "A
Buddhist Life in America,"
and "Being with Dying."
Welcome, Joan.
>> Thank you, Jeffrey.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you.
You recently
returned from Tibet.
And I think Tibet is a marvelous
example of a culture that
has created a fusion
of a Buddhist tradition
and a shamanic tradition.
>> It's true.
The elements there
are so unmediated.
And the space is
so huge that you
can see that it would
be very easy for people
to project their imaginations
into the vastness.
So it's true.
I just returned day
before yesterday
from a six-week pilgrimage
to Mount Kailash,
walking across the
Himalayas into Tibet
and circumambulating
the mountain,
doing a retreat on
Lake Manasarovar,
and then going to
Gurugram and Tirthapuri,
and then coming back to
the Limi Valley, which
is actually in Northern Nepal,
but is a Tibetan domain that
has not been contacted
by Europeans or Nepalis,
particularly, or the Chinese.
It's an extraordinary place that
has been essentially untouched.
>> One of the few left on Earth.
>> Yes, that was my experience
in being in the Limi Valley,
as though time had stopped.
And you were really
outside of anything
that we know in Western culture.
It was extraordinarily
beautiful.
In Tibet, you feel something
a little different.
You feel actually
quite different.
The Tibetan diaspora, of course,
is always there in your heart.
And there's, of course,
particularly going
across the border, the
presence of the Chinese.
And some of the
encounters that you
have with pilgrims along the
way, it's quite heartbreaking.
They feel in a way
abandoned by the world.
Not only has the
Dalai Lama left,
and there's a tiny bit
more religious freedom,
but the young Karmapa just left.
So all the heads of the major
schools have left Tibet.
>> You came amongst other
reasons to visit Mount Kailash,
also known--
>> That's right.
>> Mount Meru.
It's a sacred mountain.
And I believe in
some legends it's
considered to be the
origin of the world.
>> Jeffrey, it's a place
that I first went to in 1987.
And I was inspired by
Lama Govinda's book.
I had read the
book years before.
And I really wanted to
go there for some reason.
I think the reason is so
private I don't even know it.
And I went.
And I went under very minimal
circumstances-- hitchhiking
and with no food.
And it was a very tough journey.
I wanted to go back
and had the opportunity
to go back last
year, and actually
went back this year as well.
Well, last year when I
returned from Mount Kailash,
I think I returned like a lion.
And this year I feel I
returned like a lamb.
I'm still quite there in
the vastness of space.
Also, in the spirit
of the Tibetan people,
which in spite of the incredible
tragedy of what has happened
in Tibet and
continues to happen,
their spirit cannot
be vanquished.
>> The mountain itself is
understood to be a deity.
>> Well, yes.
And you could say
everything is a deity.
I mean, and the
other side of it is,
of course, Tibetans
and Hindus and Bon
practitioners, and
now many Westerners,
have a feeling about this
mountain that is in a way,
it's gnostic, it's beyond words.
It is like a diamond
penetrating space.
And it symbolizes and I think
evokes a quality of mind that
is very vast.
But also, it's a kind
of karmic accelerator.
When you're there, you really
can make your own difficulties
become more present.
>> Part of the ritual
activity around this mountain,
which I'm sure goes
back a long time,
probably well prior to the
Buddhist entry into Tibet,
is the practice of
circumambulating--
>> That's right.
>> The mountain.
>> There is a word for
pilgrimage in Tibet,
and the word is yatra.
And it's kind of interesting
because yatra is generally
translated as pilgrimage,
but it actually
means a journey that never ends.
So we go to Tibet, but, well,
it reminds me of a saying.
Years ago, I was
in a zen interview
and I asked the roshi a
question of a two-line poem that
went something like,
going to the temple you
take the path, entering the
temple, you leave the path.
And I said, what does this mean.
And he said, Joan, the
path is the temple.
So every step of the way
truly for me was arriving.
And it includes making
the decision even to go.
The mountain is there.
And the mountain in
a way, you embody it
by walking around
it because it is
an incredible
physical challenge.
The pass you go
over is 18,600 feet.
You're in very high altitude
coming to the mountain.
And you're in a circumstance of
extreme simplicity, minimality.
So things are very
stripped down.
And when you walk around
the mountain itself,
your legs take the mountain in.
And you're drinking
the water the rivers
that flow from the mountain.
And that goes into your body.
And the atmosphere of the
mountain is entering your body.
And I still feel very
present with that mountain.
>> Well, if you'll forgive me
for pulling you away a little
bit.
>> OK, Jeffrey.
I remember, I said for the
interview, my mute button
is pushed.
So maybe I'll wax loquacious.
But we'll see.
>> Well, I know that you
began some of your work
as a spiritual seeker and as
an anthropologist on a similar
journey.
And you mentioned, since
the journey is the temple,
I thought I would take
you for a moment back
to the Sahara Desert
and your visit
with the Dogon People of Mali.
>> Well, that journey in a way
was prompted by the fact that I
was raised in the South.
And we had a woman in my
family who was African-American
who raised me.
And her mother had been a slave.
And she had an extraordinary
sense of freedom.
And it was out of
my relationship
with her that I wanted to
explore something about Africa.
And so I went first to the
Musée de l'Homme and worked with
the Committee to Film
Ethnographique in Paris.
And then after that, in '69 and
'70, drove across the Sahara
to the Dogon, and was
there for a rite of passage
that happens once
every 53 to 60 years,
which is called the sigui.
That was a very powerful
event, which helped me valorize
or come to understand the
importance of the ritual
process in the life of a people.
>> As I recall your
description of it,
you came back from that
experience amongst some
of the most impoverished
people on Earth,
feeling that we in the West
are impoverished spiritually
in comparison.
>> Yes.
I mean, we could say the
most impoverished people
on the Earth could be the
Eritreans or the Tibetans
or people from Mali.
This simplicity that
living close to the Earth
gives rise to is
something that I
feel is so deeply enriching
for the human spirit
because it requires the
imagination and the spirit
to engage.
And so those cultures
that are Earth-cherishing,
so-called Earth-cherishing
culture or cultures
that are grown out of and
built from the Earth, I think,
have for us there's a
deep sense of nostalgia
that arises for Westerners in
relation to these cultures,
because they remember
something in their own lives
which is there but
has been forgotten.
>> Joan, we're going
to take a short break.
We'll be back.
Welcome to "Thinking
Aloud." once again,
I'm your host Jeffrey Mishlove.
My guest is Joan Halifax,
roshi of the Upaya Zen
Center in Santa Fe, New Mexico,
an anthropologist, as well.
We are exploring cross-cultural
approaches to spirituality.
A moment ago, Joan,
before our break,
you talked about the
feeling that many
of the indigenous peoples
have toward the Earth.
I think an interesting
part of your own path,
the temple of which
you have made it,
also includes your work with the
Quechua Indians in Northern New
Mexico who are very grounded in
their connection to the Earth
and who also ingest the peyote
plant as part of their rituals.
>> Yes, the Quechuas are
people from the Sierra Madre
Occidental in Mexico.
And I had read
about them and heard
about them from my
friend Barbara Myerhoff,
and also my friend Peter
Furst, who worked with them--
two anthropologists.
Was very interested in them.
And it was in I guess 1973
that a small group of Quechuas
at Esalen Institute.
And they had a beautiful
quality about them.
And they were mixing up a pot of
something and I had some of it.
And I looked into the
eyes of some of the people
and it really
ignited my compassion
to ingest peyote with them,
and also to feel something
about their wisdom.
So I spent time over
the years with Quechuas,
going down to Mexico, and
also Quechuas who came here.
And I found my experience
with these people
to be incredibly healing.
Part of it was a sort of
mountain spirit, which
really is agreeable to me.
And it's why I return so
often to the Himalayas.
And part of it was there
is such a strong emphasis
on healing in their culture.
And at that time, which
was in the early '70s,
I was having a lot of
emotional problems.
And it was nothing conventional
could touch me, if you will.
In a way, I was too familiar
with psychology and psychiatry
and very resistant.
I went to study
healing and actually I
ended up being healed, if
you will, in the process,
really strengthened.
And it was not really so
much through the psychedelics
through peyote in terms of the
fantasticness of the visions.
It was really in the
quality of the interaction
with the people.
These were hearty, complex,
devious, humorous, and very
compassionate people who were
extraordinarily kind to me.
And that kindness touched me.
It really benefited me.
>> I recall vividly a
description that you once said
of, I believe, it was the
Shaman Don Jose there, you said,
looking into his face was like
looking back 10,000 years.
>> You know, Jeffrey, I was
married to Stan Grof and worked
in a contemporary situation
with hallucinogens.
And it was interesting to be
involved with hallucinogens
with indigenous peoples because
I realized that we Westerners,
we might have some great
understanding of psychology,
but we don't have much of
an understanding of the mind
per se.
The mind is bigger
than the psyche.
And so it was an
extraordinary experience
to be in peyote
ceremony with him
and to experience something
like the transmission
through generations of
shamanic wisdom, if you will,
that he then
realized in his life,
and that was made
manifest through
the ceremonial experience and
the experience with peyote.
He was a great old
person, really,
I think you probably met him.
>> Probably.
>> Yeah, yeah.
He was just incredibly
humorous and compassionate.
And I was just
with a Tibetan man
who reminded me a
lot of Don Jose,
a man called Kunga
Dorje, who has
that same quality of impishness
and intensity and deep love.
>> Well, now it strikes me
that you've done something with
your own life, which is similar
to what the Tibetan culture has
done-- you are Buddhist
roshi of a zen center.
You've moved from a
shamanistic practice
to a Buddhist practice, which
is much what Tibetan Buddhism
itself has done.
>> Well, in a way
yes and in a way no.
It was in the mid-'60s that
I began to read Buddhism.
And I actually began to
practice in the early '70s.
Well, I mean, it was
really before that.
Meditation was
something that was
part of our life in the '60s,
but I didn't have a teacher
until the early mid '70s.
And these were like two
separate tracks for me.
And they stayed separate
for a long time.
It was really hard for
me to reconcile them.
And I began to
practice Zen Buddhism,
having been inspired by the
books of DT Suzuki and Alan
Watts, and then
having zen teachers.
And it's very plain and
there's completely no emphasis
on any visionary states.
And at the same time, there's
this psychedelic continuum,
very visionary.
It's interesting what's
happened to me over the years.
It's like a paring down process.
At a certain point, I
felt a real synthesis
between the two traditions.
But as I've grown
older, I'm almost 60,
I have this feeling of just life
being pared down to a minimum.
And maybe it's not shamanism
and it's not Buddhism either,
even though I practice
every day in my zen center.
Something is happening as
well to Buddhism in America.
And I feel part of that
change, being a woman,
having been given inka, which
is a very rare situation,
having done meditation
practice now for many years.
>> Could you define that
term, having been given inka.
>> Inka is where you could say
on one level the umbilical cord
is cut between me
and my teacher,
on another level roshi
just means old teacher.
It means seal.
But it really means that
you're just an old teacher.
This is in with within
the Japanese continuum.
And Jeffrey, being
in Japan recently
and seeing how much
sexism there is in Japan
and also being an American
woman and a Buddhist
and realizing the profound
value of the contribution
that women have made to Buddhism
in this culture, not only
feminine values, but the
democratization of Buddhism,
as well as emphasis on
family and community
and social service.
In a certain way, being on top
of the pile, I'm off of it,
if you know what I'm saying.
In a way, it's wonderful to have
received this authorization.
In another, it
remains to be seen.
>> Well, if I can reflect
back a little bit because I
haven't seen in a long time.
I remember, 25
years or so ago, we
were together at the Esalen
Institute on the dance floor.
And you struck me
then, honestly,
as a very sexy person.
And now I see what's
coming through
is what you described
in Don Jose--
the wisdom of 10,000 years.
It's written on
your face, to me,
as evidently as you must
have seen it on his.
>> I think that the wisdom of
10,000 years is in everybody.
And maybe I and lots
of others, we've
just been sort of worn away.
And what's inherent is showing
through just a little bit.
And maybe because
I've just come back
from such a tough, physical,
and spiritual and psychological
journey, I really feel--
it's strange to say, very
vulnerable, very undefended.
And it's in part the
mountain, but it's in part
the people of the mountain,
the people from Humla
and the Tibetan people,
who are so undefended,
whose dispositions are so
good, who are so incredibly
humorous and kind.
And it disarms you.
And that is for
me almost greater
than the gift of the mountain.
It's the good heart of
the mountain people.
It's a quality I
would really love
to see invoked in our culture.
It's invocable.
>> Well, we probably owe
much more to those indigenous
peoples than we appreciate.
And I think for you, Joan, that
an important part of your path
also has been being in the
forests, being in the desert,
being in the mountain.
You seem to have learned
as much from nature as
from your teachers.
>> I remember one time,
Jeffrey, Seonsanim,
my first Buddhist teacher,
was at the Ojai Foundation,
which I started years ago.
And in the audience was RD
Laing, the psychiatrist.
>> Oh, yes.
>> And Ronnie didn't
like Seonsanim at all.
And he was just snarling as
Seonsanim was giving this talk.
And then he snarled in
his Scottish brogue.
And he said, you're no teacher.
>> I'm going to have to
interrupt you, though, Joan,
because we're out
of time for now.
>> OK, I'll finish
this story later.
>> OK, yes, check your
program guides for part 2
of our two-part series on
cross-cultural spirituality
with Joan Halifax.
[MUSIC PLAYING]